
Rachel pointed out to me on facebook that this is a situation where one should do a t-test, and that Monte Carlo simulations can't be used to calculate statistical significance.  She's completely wrong about both of those things, but it did make me go back and double check the simulation, and I realized I made a slight error in that last step.  The statements above are technically true, but that's not how we would usually calculate significance.  I made the mistake of treating the distribution as one-sided, when it is actually two-sided.  In other words, we would also consider the result signifcant if the home field advantage completely disapeared as well!  Anyway, we expected the home teams to win 26.88 games, so we can do a proper signifcance measure by replacing the last python line above with:
print 'percent of sims farther from the expected value than the replacements =%.2f'%(np.size(np.where(np.abs(ack-26.88) >= 31-26.88))/10e3*100)

And we find that ~25% of the time, we would expect a result even more extreme than what we observed (Either an even stronger home field advantage, or a strong road-team advantage).  This is still very far from the 5% astronomers use as a cut-off to declare something significant, so we can't statistically claim the replacement refs are increasing the home field advantage.

Now that the real refs have been back for three weeks, we might as well check how the home teams are doing.  Home teams are now 56-35, so the record under the regular refs is 25-18 for a 58% home-team winning percentage, only one more win than we would expect from the historical 56% (note, there have only been 43 games after 3 weeks of regular refs because the NFL bye weeks have started).  

What's the take-away lesson?  Well, we didn't detect a significant increase in the home field advantage with the replacement refs, but we might have if they had been used in more games.  Given how fast the home field advantage returned to it's historical value, if there's a league using replacement officials in the future (or maybe just new officials), I'm still going to make sure I place more bets than usual on the home teams.
